Does it feel good to be in a state where
it's like every national election is
just geared towards making the citizens
of Pennsylvania happy? Like all like
that is, you know, you're talking to
some mayor from another uh you know from
Florida. It's like you should try being
try being a swing state. Try being the
most important state for the electoral
college. That must be nice.
>> It's it it can be. Uh it also turns you
into like like I have given tours of my
city to foreign press every country and
all the reporters that they go to the
diner in Pennsylvania. Right. That's the
classic trope.
>> Exactly. Yeah. Then so I mean it's it's
nice to be the center of attention that
way. um in the the like in the
politicians kind of want to make you
happy, but
>> practically speaking, you know, there's
>> like as a mayor, your job is to just
meet the needs of your residents, right?
Like that's what you dial in on. And so
whatever they're doing nationally, like
you're just worried about residents.
>> Hello and welcome to another episode of
the Odd Thoughts podcast. I'm Tracy
Aloway
>> and I'm Joe Weisenthal. Joe, do you ever
discover little cultural [music] blind
spots that you had in your life?
>> Um, I'm miss
>> Where are you going with this?
>> So, I discovered one recently and it
kind of led to a minor epiphany for me,
but um I had heard the Billy Joel song
Allentown. I had never watched the video
and in preparation for this episode, I
watched the video and suddenly a bunch
of Simpsons references made sense to me.
>> Interesting.
>> And I don't mean to be I don't mean to
be very grand millennial by making a
Simpsons reference.
>> Isn't it depressing how if you make a
Simpsons reference to like someone
younger in the office, they look at you
with a blank stare? I know. It's really
depress
I I just don't do it anymore because
it's so depressing.
>> I know. And here I am doing it on the
podcast. But I actually
>> cuz we're, you know, we're of the same
generation, so we could do it. It might
>> we can do it. This is a safe space.
>> Listeners might not get it.
>> So the reason I bring it up though is
for, you know, kind of a serious point.
Uh, not just to talk about Billy Joel
music. Although, now that I think about
it, he has a lot of songs about like the
political economy of America. But it is
because Allentown, Pennsylvania,
basically became a poster child for
de-industrialization and the hollowing
out of American manufacturing in the
1980s.
>> That was a great intro and thank you.
And of course, right, so we know and
obviously over the years on OddLots,
we've talked a lot about
industrialization, de-industrialization,
re-industrialization.
Great. All very interesting themes.
Everyone maybe like feels in their gut
somehow that they're like pro-
reindustrialization, whatever that
means, right? But then the gap between
like somehow like we feel good about
producing physical things, we want more
of that, great. But what does that
actually look like in practice? What are
these jobs? What are these potential
industries? Then it suddenly gets much
more hazy, right? People don't know what
that actually looks like in practice,
>> right? How do you actually go about
implementing industrial policy on a
local scale? And I have to say the other
thing I found out in researching for
this podcast, I had no idea, but
Allentown, Pennsylvania was also the
site of the first some of the first
mass- prodduced uh transistors, which
are like the precursor to semiconductors
of today.
>> Can I say one random thing about Billy
Joel before we go further? you know,
because obviously you mentioned he talks
about uh you know, a lot of political
economy things and including of course
and we didn't start the fire. The final
line of that song is like something
about the Cola Wars and he's like I
can't take it anymore. And I just think
it's really funny that the Cola Wars,
Coke versus Pepsi is the thing that
tipped him over the edge. Like all the
Vietnam War, all these things happened
and finally the thing that tipped him
over the edge was the cola. Anyway, side
track, but I just had to get that out.
We should do a whole episode on Billy
Joel songs at some point, including my
favorite karaoke standard, which is Down
Easter Alexa, all about the decline of
the fishing industry. But anyway,
>> Allentown, Pennsylvania, let's focus.
Uh, we do, in fact, have the perfect
guest. We're going to be speaking with
the mayor of Allentown, Matt Turk. So,
thank you so much for coming on All
Thoughts.
>> It's from Graham Placet. It's a huge
pleasure to be here.
>> That actually helps cuz we are we are at
the city lab conference in Madrid,
right? And uh we just saw you have a a
medal from the from the marathon over
the weekend. Tell us about that.
>> Uh landed on Saturday, went right to the
marathon expo, picked up my bib. 24
hours later, I was starting the Madrid
42k. Uh not 26 miles, 42 km uh marathon.
It was hot. Uh it was hilly. It was
beautiful. Uh great crowd support. Uh
phenomenal marathon. finished the
marathon and then went right to a
reception for Bloomberg City Lab and
I've been non-stop since then.
>> That is dedication to both cardio and
city planning. So, um, congrats on that.
>> I mentioned Allentown, the song and the
video in the intro and I discovered
there's some controversy about this
because apparently the steel making was
more in Bethlehem rather than in
Allentown. So, should Billy Joel have
been talking about semiconductors
instead of steel? [laughter] I I mean he
there's he could have been talking about
Mac trucks. He could have been talking
about silk manufacturing. Um that's like
the local controversy is that like he's
talking about, you know, Bethlehem, but
he didn't rhyme as well with [laughter]
shutting factories down. But then
there's, you know, I was surprised. I
thought that everyone in the country
felt like not great about the song
Allentown. Then I met the mayor of
Toledo and he was like, "That's a great
song. It's about the working man and
blah blah blah blah blah." And I was
like, "What are you talking about?" that
like this is the song that like
everybody in our region in the Lehigh
Valley just like dreads hearing because
it's about this like different era that
maybe was like felt right in the moment
in 1982 like that maybe kind of captured
the moment but in 2026 it's like we it
doesn't sound further from it couldn't
sound further from the truth. give us
like a little Allentown history like
what is the timeline when we talk about
these sort of key industries that were
once associated with the city of
Allentown? What was the sort of peak of
it and when was the sort of trough
maybe?
>> Yeah, I mean so I mean the city was
founded back in 1762. It like many uh it
had its revolutionary moment. We hid the
Liberty Bell there. Um but it really
picked up and incorporated in 1867
um for the kind of uh reconstruction and
that's when the industry really started
to to it started to industrialize like
many American cities.
>> Uh early industry was cigar
manufacturing. So tobacco that was grown
in Lancaster was shipped to Allentown
for production into cigars. Silk
manufacturing became a pretty big deal
in that area. It was a place where silk
could be brought in and then processed.
Um, in the early uh kind of 1910s, sort
of around the first world war, uh, Mac
truck moved to Allentown from Brooklyn.
This was like 1915. Uh, and industrial
production of that of those vehicles
started. We manufactured uh, Volti
bombers, a particular type of bomber for
World War II. This is all coincident
with Bethleam's steel industry rising
up. Um the the industrial work continued
through to I think you guys m me me me
me me me me me me me me me me me me me
me me me me mentioned the transistor and
western electric. That was kind of
>> a big story. But then like a lot of
places uh manufacturing started to
decline. Uh not as strongly in Allentown
as other parts of the country, but um
you know the Western Electric plant
eventually shut down. Uh the
>> what year were we talking about with
that?
>> Western Electric was in the '7s. It
actually and it it it morphed into
something else. It what eventually
became Broadcom. So there's still some
manufacturing. It didn't necessarily
exist in the city. It spread out into
suburban parts of the region. There's
still some chip manufacturing occurring
or or wafer polishing occurring in the
area. We still have the kind of muscle
memory of of semiconductor
manufacturing. Um but but again the the
industry evolved and and changed. The
Volti aircraft shut down when there was
no need to produce bombers anymore. Uh
Mac trucks continued operations in
Allentown but in the 80s shifted most of
its production to a plant in Mckenji
that still operates today. Uh a lot of
those old Mac plants were acquired by an
organization that I used to work for,
the Allentine Economic Development
Incorporation, and repurposed. initially
repurposed for the the this is the 80s.
I I the thought at the time was that it
could be uh you know an incubator
facility, a business incubator. It it
did become that but it was more of a
manufacturing incubator. Um these were
old uh sawtooth roof buildings with 12
to 18 foot ceilings. So some big spaces
but not a lot of clearance. They weren't
suited for modern manufacturing. That's
what a lot of the building stock in
Allentown looked like. But the the
production was still occurring in some
capacity in the city, definitely in the
region. When the steel shut down in
Bethlehem in 1998, I think was when they
did their last cast.
>> That's when you leading up to that, the
region had already started to think
about how to diversify, how to build on
uh the Western Electric, the
semiconductor manufacturer. Lehigh
University was a a source of engineering
talent. They started to diversify out
into life sciences. Um so there's
there's some uh precursor drugs that are
manufactured there. Some medical
supplies that are still manufactured
there. Brawn. Um another one that I
didn't mention was Air Products. So it's
a industrial gas manufacturer. I know
you guys were recently talking about
helium. Um Air Products is like
>> it's so fun talking to a listener.
[laughter] It makes it so easy. like
helium.
>> Oh yeah, the helium. So helium is
something that air products
manufacturers um it's one of those like
head scratchers when you're talking
about a region's industrial output to
say like we make like a an element like
like an elemental element like the
periodic table. Yeah. Um it's hard to
describe like how that happens but that
was founded uh in Allentown actually was
founded in Tennessee and moved to
Allentown in the 50s. Um so a lot of
that production was still occurring. the
the the kind of civic leaders of the
time in the early 90s is they could
foresee the end of Betham Steel when it
was acquired. I think it was acquired by
Arur Middle. Um but they could see the
end in sight. And so they they made a
conscious effort to diversify working
with the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to
stand up some techled economic
development which had its it was
successful in a few places. The biggest
success in attracting uh investment or
the biggest kind of economic development
story for the region was in 2006 when
the region convinced Olympus uh which is
the manufacturer of surgical devices to
relocate its North American headquarters
to the uh to they were out in suburban
Bethlehem. But but that's been the
character, right? There's there's it's a
very diversified economy. Today it's
still about 17% of the jobs are
manufacturing jobs. So it's much higher
than many part other parts of the
country and it's held pretty steady. Um
so that's
amazing. Well, that was a fantastic
summary. But on that note, I mean, I
think a lot of cities and towns in
America, whether they're in the Rusfelt
or Pennsylvania or the South or
wherever, who have gone through this
de-industrialization
um phase, they all say they want to
build back their manufacturing sector in
some way. But it feels like Allentown
has kind of gone about it in a slightly
different way in that you've had a sort
of grand strategy or vision for how to
do that rather than try to attract just
like individual businesses in a peace
meal way. Can you talk about how you
actually formulated that plan?
>> Yeah, so for I started working for the
economic development corporation in 2008
and we had the manufacturing incubator.
It's called the bridgeworks
manufacturing incubator that was in
place at that time. it it was trying to
pivot away from manufacturing when I got
there. Um, we also had an industrial
building that sort of funded our
existence where we had a t-shirt
manufacturer, a industrial valves
manufacturer um and uh somebody who was
building large scale tents as tenants
and they were kind of keeping the
organization alive. There was this, you
know, in 2008, it was right kind of in
the early days of the global financial
crisis. There was some concern about how
we would recover economically, what we
would do. Um, but these early
investments in manufacturing were I from
what I could see looking ahead something
we shouldn't turn our backs on. um there
was a this healthy manufact seemingly
healthy manufacturing economy in place
in the Lehigh Valley and it felt like it
felt like there was an opportunity to to
build for the future. Um I worked with
our uh CEO or executive director at that
time to start thinking about how we
might position the area as a place where
you could bring smaller footprint
manufacturing. We knew we had this
building stock of buildings that were
smaller than 100,000 square feet,
sometimes on multiple stories. It was a
kind of gravity flow model of
manufacturing where you would load in
raw material at the top of the building
and as it gained weight, it would drop
down the building for final finishing on
the ground floor and then shipping.
um we we felt like there was an
opportunity to kind of leverage the the
existing uh industrial inventory to
attract manufacturers that were more
boutique. I I remember reading an
article in the Wall Street Journal in
maybe 2009 or 2010 about a a a bag
manufacturer in San Francisco who was
like very proud of being in San
Francisco. I was like, "This is I think
there's something here for us." I
reached out to the manufacturer at the
time. This was kind of around the same
time as the rise of like maker spaces
and 3D printing was kind of coming
online. It looked like you could do some
stuff in a smaller form factor.
>> And we kept thinking like this is a
chance for us with these strong roots in
manufacturing to to bring some of it
back. And we got deep into it and really
explored. We we formed something called
the Urban Manufacturing Alliance in
collaboration with San Francisco and the
Pratt Institute in New York and our
friends in the Philadelphia Industrial
Development Corporation and in Detroit
to just kind of bring cities who were
interested in manufacturing together.
>> We started talking about reshoring or
onshoring at that time, but it was
really just like a maybe Yeah, it felt
distant.
>> It's interesting. I'm glad you brought
up the um the sort of maker 3D printing
phenomenon because
>> that was such a thing around that time.
>> It was but it's forgotten, isn't it?
Because the when we talk generally about
the tailwinds or the growth of the
2010s, it's almost entirely people talk
about tech, right? Software, etc., the
internet and all that. And then we talk
about postco this re, you know, this new
enthusiasm for reshoring. But it there
was the there was like this forgotten
chapter that within particularly the
first half of the 2010s the various
maker spaces and the 3D printers and
people were really excited about that
kind of fizzled out like that like that
mini movement you don't hear as much
fizzled out for sure but so we did a a
re-industrialization strategy in 2014 we
worked with somebody to evaluate our
total industrial stock um I had I had at
that point moved on to work for the
regional economic development
corporation but was still involved with
this urban manufacturing alliance at the
region. We could see that manufacturing
was still important. I had a better
sense of what other types of
manufacturing was occurring in the area.
Um we developed a a a strategy kept
thinking what what I kept seeing at the
region was that there is real demand to
be in the Lehigh Valley and in these
smaller footprint uh buildings. So we
saw inquiries all the time for buildings
between 40 and 80,000 square feet. But
this was a time when the Lehigh Valley
was pivoting its economy toward
transportation and warehousing building
million square ft buildings with 24 to
36 ft ceilings. Uh really as this other
technological trend of the ecom started
to show up, this was the high demand for
industrial space. So, we had lots of
interest from small manufacturers,
particularly coming out of places like
Brooklyn where maybe it was like not
quite the place to be who wanted to
spread their arms a little bit and maybe
have access to to talent. They were
trying to be in the Lehigh Valley, but
we didn't have a ton of building space
to meet their needs. So when we built
that re-industrialization strategy, a
big part of it was how do we position
the the the built environment for this
demand and some of that is, you know,
rehabbing existing industrial buildings
as surprise surprise industrial
buildings.
>> Um [snorts] so it's it's continued on
from there.
>> Yeah. So this is another thing I learned
about Allentown. I'm full of Allentown
facts at the moment, but apparently
Allentown is within a day's drive of 40%
of the population in the US. Is that
true?
>> Yeah, it's it it's over a hundred
million many more than 100 million
people. Um, and that's what made it such
a strong destination for some of the
ecom, but it's also like that go, you
know, you go back to like why it is a a
vibrant economic region is that it's a
great place for weight gaining
industries, right? So the other big
thing we worked on at the regional
economic development corporation was we
recruited Ocean Spray to make most of
its great uh cranberry juice in the
Lehigh Valley. Sam Adams was brewing
most of its beer in the Lehigh Valley.
>> Was it weight gaining industry you add
water to basically right? So you when
you have the the cranberries come into
the plant like to become cranberry juice
you add a ton of water. it doesn't make
sense to produce that far away and then
ship all that water. So because you're
not just you know within 40 driving a
day's drive of 40% of the population
you're also close to New York. So a lot
of like you know uh Kurig Dr. Pepper has
a big production plant. There's a lot of
food manufacturing that occurs there as
well. And then on the manufacturing
side, you also because of the ecom,
because of the food manufacturing, you
saw a lot of packaging and bottling uh
manufacturing show up. So, one of our
most recent in Allentown successes was
recruiting a company called Schlles
Bottle that manufactures bottles for uh
for for beverages. And they wanted to be
close to the production point. So,
they're manufacturing bottles in
Allentown, filling it with beverages and
shipping it back to New York. This is so
core like Ricardo Houseman coded stuff
like okay you have this one industry and
then you have innovation in an adjacent
industry super uh
>> monkey swinging from trees
>> I'm also yeah I'm also just like
learning all these terms I you know
gravity based manufacturing I had or
weight gaining this is all um fantastic
stuff
>> weight gain industry is I think what
we're both doing in Madrid
>> that's what we're both doing in Madrid
that was really well done
>> gaining yeah um we should have run a
marathon and then then we could have uh
compensated for all that.
>> Big picture, you know,
>> people what are like, you know,
obviously the the this is all against
the backdrop of this vortex of
manufacturing going to China largely,
etc. When people think, you know, you're
at a conference like this and probably a
lot of mayors are interested in
re-industrialization, etc. What types of
industries are good candidates generally
for thinking of like what should be
built locally? Like something like
plastic bag or bags? It's like well I
don't know maybe that could be offshore.
What are like strong candidates for what
is durable here?
>> It's you mentioned plastic bags because
one of the things we recruited as I was
kind of leaving the world of economic
development and going to politics was a
Turkish plastic bag manufacturer. Um so
that that was kind of interesting. the I
think so one of the things that
distinguished the region and I think is
good for onshoring and I want to go back
on the onoring for a second. Um when we
developed this strategy when we're
talking about onshoring or reshoring
back in the early 2010s there was no
like we didn't know a global pandemic
was going to come and disrupt supply
chains. We we were thinking about like
the the logistics of making things in
close to the customer and and I was I
was thinking a lot about the theft of IP
in China and how it [clears throat] was
kind of like th those components of
globalism didn't make a ton of sense.
You were like kind of giving away your
most precious resource. So a lot of it
was driven by like how do you kind of
capture the spirit of manufacturing?
Now COVID hit and all of a sudden that's
what brought it into stark relief.
That's what made it make sense. But so
one of the things that I think makes a
ton of sense and we still see a lot of
in Allentown whether it's the
transistors or it's the bag
manufacturing or Westport axle
manufacturers axles for Mac trucks in
Allentown area. It's components, right?
It's how do you how do you derisk the
supply chain by diversifying your
component manufacturing? That makes a
lot of sense in cities because you're
not building the whole truck there,
right? And to build the whole truck, you
need something like Lord Town or
Lordstown. You need River Rouge. You
need the enormous factories. When you're
building the components, whatever those
components might look like, you can
exist in a much smaller form factor.
something as small as 40,000 square
feet. But even like to get down to like
the what we were calling craft
manufacturing at the time, you might be
able to exist in a much smaller space
and perhaps the ground floor of a
mixeduse building. And that's what the
next step for us was and what more
cities should be doing, I think, is
making sure that your zoning allows for
light industrial to take place in
residential neighborhoods so that you're
not kind of you you have to make sure
that you allow this stuff to happen in
your city. And the new manufacturing,
you know, we think about Pittsburgh and
the the early part of the 20th century
as as being so thick with smog that you
couldn't even see across the river. we
were, you know, you still see pictures
of I remember being in Tanzhin in China
in 2017 and like you couldn't see as you
were going across the bridge. Um that's
not what manufacturing really looks like
anymore. So you can you can kind of do
that in cities. Um so those you know as
cities are thinking about what type of
manufacturing you might try to attract,
I think high value component
manufacturer, light touch but uh high
tech. Um, again, taking advantage of the
resources that we have in American
cities and taking advantage of the fact
that, you know, people now are choosing
where they're going to be first and then
what they're going to do second. And the
cities that have a locationational
advantage on cost of or quality of life
can attract those industries if they set
themselves up to do it.
>> Right. say more about the reszoning
process because if there's one thing I
remember from playing Sim City for
hours, you know, in the 19 late 1990s,
it was that if you if you zone industry
next to residential, your population is
not going to be happy. So, I'm very
curious like how much that has actually
changed and what the reasoning process
is like now versus say 10 years ago. So,
a lot of cities because of the housing
crisis are exploring more aggressive uh
zoning policy that allows for uh allows
for denser housing, allows for different
types of housing. We just passed in uh
the beginning of 2026 a reform to our
zoning code and a reform to our zoning
map that is a form-based code. So it's
really focused less on what's happening
inside the building and more on what the
buildings will look like.
>> Interesting.
>> Um [clears throat] so that can allow
that's the type of thing that can allow
for now in Sim City when you build ind
when you zoned industrial you were going
to get like the the tire manufacturing
plant. Um not a great idea for cities to
have tire manufacturing plants in their
downtowns but
>> great idea to have like craft brewing or
like small garment assembly. um
something that is kind of like bespoke
manufacturing to so I think what cities
can do as they're investigating
the limitations of their zoning code to
build toward the cities that they want
to be is dig in and understand exactly
what you might allow. I mean in zoning
you have to allow for all uses somewhere
in the in the the jurisdiction. So if
you can allow for certain types of
manufacturing uses, you create
flexibility that can add some vibrancy
to the neighborhood.
>> We, you know, I I think I go back to
like one of my big points when I was in
the Urban Manufacturing Alliance that I
don't know what it looks like now, but
>> we we talked about the lack of interest
in young people working in manufacturing
and that's always been one of the
challenges. Yeah.
>> Um, and one thing that occurred to me is
that when so Mac when Mac Trucks moved
to Allentown in 1923, they built a plant
right next to Well, they built the plant
and then they built the the worker
housing right next door to the plant and
people would walk to work all day. And
what I what we knew then is that it it
sounds amazing and that's people would
like to do that whatever they're doing
for work. When young when children saw
people walking to work with the lunchbox
and knew that that person was going to
work on the in the silk plant or in the
the the truck plant, they saw a person
working and a person who was like
connected to manufacturing. When we
moved all of the production out to the
suburbs and people were getting in a car
to drive to work, the like rando kid on
the street who's just, you know, hula
hooping or whatever doesn't get a chance
to see workers and doesn't get a chance
to see the dignity of work in
manufacturing and loses interest in it.
And so we're so far removed now. Um,
we've tried to like do things whether it
was through 3D printing or like kind of
get kids excited about manufacturing,
but fundamentally it's still the work is
removed from everyday life. And so if
you can get back to that point where you
can add manufacturing back to everyday
life, I think there's an opportunity to
to rekindle the interest in the careers.
>> We need to do an episode how Sim City
destroyed, right? like people
internalizing all these lessons from a
video game and then oh then suddenly all
of the manufacturing goes out into the
exerbs and then no one sees the workers
and then suddenly city ruined Sim City
ruined.
>> I would love I would love to see that
honestly like the I think the mayor like
any mayor who has played Sim City like
the minute you sit down at the desk
you're like oh my god this is total BS
like
>> just amazing we now I really actually
want to do this episode. Um so obvious
let's you know postcoid you get this
reenthusiasm for uh manufacturing
um just you know supply chain reasons
also national security reasons we get
the chips act we get the inflation
reduction act did you what did that look
like from the perspective of uh these
big programs these sort of the biden
euro programs what did that look like
from your perspective
>> so for us uh one thing was you know it
was like a return to an industrial
policy, right? Like previously the
United States was like the industrial
policy didn't make a lot of sense for an
economic development professional. Now
we saw like the this the federal
government was pushing in a particular
direction, right? And it was like let's
start making stuff again. We so ours
when I I became mayor in 2022. Um
when you when you are sworn in as mayor,
you come in with a bunch of campaign
promises. you sit in the seat and you
realize like all of a sudden there's a
completely new like set of challenges
that you have to unlock, right? So all
the stuff you went there to do in the
campaign, it's nice, but there's more
pressing uh needs. Among the things that
I could see in the city was that we were
um well, we didn't know what we didn't
know. So we had a lot to learn. We had
to dig in and understand the city a
little better and understand what was
going on. Um, we also didn't like we had
to let some relationships fail and so we
needed to get back and make sure that
our partners were on the same page as us
and we kind of lost the capacity to like
innovate to get creative and and do new
things. Um, so I was grateful that, you
know, I entered into the Bloomberg
Harvard City Leadership Initiative just
at just the right moment when when I was
feeling desperate and they kind of
invested in that capacity. Through doing
that, I was able to attack one of the
things that was clear clearly an issue,
which was road safety. We had there was
a federal grant, the safe streets for
all program that was helping cities plan
for safer streets. I'm going to get to
the point, I promise.
>> Okay. Okay. Okay.
>> So, we uh I was a I'm a bicycling and
running guy, so I wanted to like and I I
felt like we could do better for our
city if we had safer streets. Uh
Bloomberg stood up with some partners,
the local infrastructure hub. It helped
me teach my team how to use data to
apply for federal funds. It helped us
think about how we could work with
partners to accomplish, you know, good
outcomes for residents and try some new
things. We were lucky. Uh I also, you
know, got right in Secretary
Buddhajeser's face and said, "I need
help." Um and we're we were lucky to get
a planning grant through that program.
That experience helped us understand how
to as a city return to federal grants.
At the same about right after we were
awarded that safe streets grant, the
economic development administration
announced its recompete pilot project
and it was focused on areas that were I
think this is June June of 2023 is
focused on areas that had a high prime
age employment gap. And so prime age
employment gap is people between the
ages of 25 to 54. Prime age uh
employment gap is people who are either
unemployed at higher than average rates
or out of the labor force. Um we looked
and saw that Allentown in fact had a
high prime age employment gap. Um we
ours was like at 6%. Um, we dialed into
a particular neighborhood and saw that
in that area is about 12% a region of
about or a neighborhood of about 23,000
people that were just disproportionately
out of the labor force or um or
unemployed. And we started to dig in on
that group of people and how could we at
the same time prepare as we're thinking
about like the this these changes and
the changes to the demands of the
workforce, how can we make sure that our
people could work, right? And that was
where these two things came together is
we knew that through uh working with our
partners at the Lehigh Valley Economic
Development Corporation, there's still a
high demand for manufacturing labor uh
as well as healthcare. We knew that the
barriers to getting people to good jobs
sometimes were uh a lack of available
resources, things like flexible and
affordable child care. Um, we knew that
people were sometimes challenged by
transportation that if those jobs are
out in the suburbs and they didn't have
a car, it was hard to get to them. And
we also knew that if we wanted to make
sure that people without cars could get
to work, went to build industrial sites
in the city. So we put together an
application and submitted it to EDA and
again because of the work that we had
done in the past were successful and
we're able to so we landed a strategic
development grant uh in December of 23
and then we got a $20 million investment
for implementation. So our team right
now is working to make sure that as we
work to bring these manufacturing jobs
to not just the city but to the entire
region that Allenonians are well
positioned to get to those jobs. Um and
that's that is you know the big a big
piece where where cities have to be able
to play a role is making sure that that
people have the the tools they need to
access the good things that are
happening in their economy.
Have you got all the grant money? The
Biden era grant money.
>> All of it. So, okay. So, there's
nothing.
>> We made sure ear like as soon as the the
November 5th, 2024, like we went into
overdrive to just make sure that we
weren't at risk of of losing anything.
And that came through the Chips and
Science Act. And it was a relatively
small program. So, and and you know,
practically speaking, our region is
intensely political. Um, so it would not
make sense to roll back some of that. I
had to fight for some other stuff to
make sure that we got it, including
>> USD I wrote a letter to Secretary
Rollins and the USDA about how important
trees were to cities across America. Um,
we've worked to make sure that we didn't
lose the the street funding. Um, but we,
you know, we're for some of the funding
for things that you do in cities, it's
like very practical. It's it's good for
residents. It's it should be
nonpartisan. As long as you like are not
exclusively focused on the various
different things the administration is
focused on, you have a good chance of
holding it. So, speaking of
practicality, um I I sometimes get the
sense that there's like a bit of a
disconnect between how people in DC are
thinking about industrial policy,
whether it's Trump or the Biden
administration, versus like mayors such
as yourself, who actually have to
implement this stuff and figure out
exactly how to spend the money. Like,
what's the biggest area of I guess like
tension that you see or what could DC
actually do to make using those federal
funds easier for you?
Oh [sighs] wow. Um, so I think that
going back to I there is tension for
sure, right? And I think but I think
that there are um I think that the a
recognition like the biggest thing that
DC could do is make sure that people are
not worried about their health care or
not worried about putting food on the
table or not worried about a thousand
other things and can worry about just
like being part of this American dream
and like and building towards something
and
>> and that they could, you know, pe be
part of the the dignity of work. And so
there's some things that they could just
focus less on or like trying to cut less
of. I think that um cities probably
don't think as much about immigration uh
from that perspective as an economic
driver. But I think that we have to
continue to bring new people in, bring
new ideas in, make uh American cities
places that can receive investment and
knowing that somewhat that investment is
like it's intellectual capital, right?
So, we want people to come in and feel
comfortable making stuff and making new
technology in our cities. Um, I I I want
to say I think it's not uncommon for
mayors to be pretty bipartisan in in
Allentown. We're my uh one of my
senators is Senator Dave McCormack who
he's on the he's the he's a Republican.
I'm a Democrat, but I appreciate Senator
McCormack's interest in competitiveness
and trying to attract industry
[clears throat] and particular
manufacturing to Pennsylvania. And I
think my conversations with Senator
McCormack, he is I think he's somewhat
agnostic about where that happens. I
think he's, you know, be he'd be happy
if the manufacturing investments happen
in the suburbs or in the cities. He's,
it doesn't matter to him as much as as
Pennsylvania remaining competitive. He's
he I know he was involved with one of
the the big kind of uh future for
thinking or future-looking manufacturing
uh
investments that occurred in our area is
Eli Liy announced a $3.5 billion
investment that is just outside of the
city limits. But their $3.5 billion
investment will create like 850 jobs. I
want to make sure that all of the
residents of the city of Allentown are
capable of accessing those jobs. I also
want to make sure that any of the um
supply chain that goes into that Lily uh
GLP-1 manufacturing is can be produced
in the city if it need if it can be. Um
we want to make sure that we're that
we're capable of of connecting to that.
Um so that's one thing I think
continuing to make sure that uh that the
the country is competitive. The other
thing is and this is one that we're kind
of going back and forth with. We, you
know, Governor Shapiro has launched a
very aggressive uh economic development
strategy that wants to attract more
investment and lots of different types
of investment. Um, I think there's and
I've I've spoken with Bruce Katz uh
formerly at Brookings about this is that
Pennsylvania seems like it's well
situated to be a a a center of defense
manufacturing in this new world. Um
clearly like there's you based on what's
happening in Iran there is a like
there's still need for munitions right
and how we can play a role in that is I
think part of our future that was you we
proudly tell the story of how Bethleam
Steel helped win the war in World War II
by building the the the ships that that
helped us win the war. I talked about
Volti bomber is helping us win the war.
I think that there is we have we're home
to Mac Defense in Allentown. Mac Defense
makes giant like heavyduty trucks for
the US military. Um we can compete in
that area as well and that is
manufacturing. Um, so I think there's
the as if the the federal government
focuses on uh creating opportunities in
cities and in states to host
manufacturing and and makes it easy for
that to happen and makes it easy to hire
people and train people to be ready for
that work. Um, I think that's that's
where we need them to play. You already
sort of alluded to this, but does it
feel good to be in a state where it's
like every national election is just
geared towards making the citizens of
Pennsylvania happy? Like all like that
is you're you talking to some mayor from
another uh you know from Florida. It's
like you should try being try being a
swing state. Try being the most
important state for the electoral
college. That must be nice.
>> It's it it can be. Uh it also turns you
into like like I have given tours of my
city to foreign press
>> every country
>> right and all the reporters that they go
to the diner in Pennsylvania right
that's the classic trope
>> yeah and so I mean it's it's nice to be
the center of attention that way um in
the the like and the politicians kind of
want to make you happy but
>> practically speaking you know there's
like as a mayor your job is to just meet
the needs of your resident right? Like
that's what you dial in on and so
whatever they're doing nationally like
you're just worried about residents.
>> One reason that people are very excited
or that people are have an affinity
towards manufacturing is the jobs right
and you mentioned the jobs and people
seeing people go to work. Another reason
particularly over the last several years
or the last postco is for national
security reasons not wanting to uh rely
on China or other countries for really
critical things. However, some of these
most advanced industries, they're not
act they're not particularly going to be
jobheavy, right? There's a lot of
robotics and increasing automation. Do
you is there a disconnect between the
sort of again maybe emotional maybe like
the sort of romantic notions that people
have about manufacturing versus the
reality of the actual labor intensivity
of some of these industries? I I think
that as from the mayor's perspective, I
probably am more in that kind of
romantic world, right? Like where we're
just kind of like, yeah, this, you know,
pe we envision a world in which people
will always be putting their hands on
stuff, right? One way or another. And
when you get into a higher technology
where like we we already have robots
doing like precision surgery, presumably
some of the precision manufacturing is
going to be better done with a robotic
hand than the steady hand or strong back
of of uh somebody on a line. Um I do
think that as you like the there's still
and this is a vibe that I'm starting to
get. Mayors tend to pick up like cuz
we're on the ground we start to hear the
vibes before they become national vibes.
But I think that there's there's a very
strong at least in in my city and some
other cities that I've I've visited,
there's like a a strong like handmade or
like a rejection of the robots and AI,
whether it's art or like the the
produced goods. I don't know if anybody
I don't know what the the logical end
[clears throat] to that is, but I think
there's on on the consumer side there's
there's still a desire. I think people
romanticize some of the product, right?
And they'd rather have something that
that people have made on the um on the
jobs side of it. I think that there's
there's still this uh like this belief
that um that we need to preserve the
dignity of work, that there's always
going to be that we're going to have to
find some way to allow people to
continue to work. That like maybe you
don't need the robots running the whole
warehouse, right? that maybe you need,
>> you know, somebody to to be involved.
And you know, there's a we've seen that
like this is I I my first job out of
grad school was working in the billboard
industry and in Panama and I remember
vividly talking to somebody who was, you
know, I introduced myself. This is in my
economic development days and I was
like, oh, you know, I I first I started
in billboards and the guy was in private
equity and he was like, that's great,
man. Billboards are awesome. the only
thing better than billboards is uh coin
up laundromats. I was like I was like
[laughter] dude you're in the wrong
business now because like maybe in
private equity like that was a great
idea like the fewer fewer jobs like down
to self storage which I think is the
worst thing in the cities
>> but um but like we're job creators like
we have to find ways to to create jobs
to to create opportunities for people to
be dignified by their work. So, while
there may be some value to like
squeezing out every single nickel of uh
cost from some operation, there's a lot
to benefit cities and to benefit society
of having people, you know, actually
putting their hands on things. Can you
talk specifically about how you're
thinking about data centers because this
is like the example of what we're
getting at and in theory, you know,
Allentown, you got a bunch of big
warehouses and things like that that
>> presumably access to that needed energy
at one point, right?
>> Yeah. Um I have lots of sophisticated
and unsophisticated thoughts about data
centers. Um we're we as a city and as a
mayor, I'm thinking about them in a
couple ways. One, like they're very
clearly a political issue now. And
they're a political issue for I hate
saying both sides, but for both sides,
right? Like we
>> No, they really are.
>> It's kind of crazy.
>> There's legislation. So, I think that
So, we uh we amended our zoning like a
right after we amended our zoning
ordinance, we then we made an amendment
to the ordinance with with reference to
data centers. Um the rea the reality for
a city like Allentown and most cities in
the country is that we don't really have
any space for data centers is it's
unlikely that a hypers scale well it's
not just unlikely a hyperscaler cannot
locate in the city of Allentown unless
they acquire a bunch of homes and and
demolish them just or something like
that. [laughter]
>> But but it's it is reality in places
like Phoenix, right? Um,
>> so we amended our zoning code to just
set up certain requirements around the
establishment of a data center. Um, just
to make sure that our backs are covered.
Um, you you don't want to the worst
thing that happens in any municipality
is like something shows up that people
don't want and your hands are tied
because your zoning allows for it. So,
we made sure that we are covered in that
respect.
>> Sorry, just be clear. Cover
>> like you've data centerproofed your
zoning. Is that what that means? We in
the process of review right now to make
sure that any proposed data center has
to demonstrate uh not just the highway
use or the um the water use but also
like energy sources. So we're we're
making sure that data centers that
proposed for the city uh have can
demonstrate their compliance basically.
Um so it's it's political. I you know
I've as I understand the technology and
this is probably the less sophisticated
side of the the thought it's getting
smaller and smaller right the data
centers do not have to exist at this
incred you know to take up lots and lots
of land they can exist perhaps in
downtowns I don't know what their energy
needs are going to be I know that most
mayors are concerned about data centers
not because they're worried about land
use or a lack of jobs but because
utility bills are significantly rising
at At the same time that uh food bills
are rising and gas bills are rising and
housing is getting more expensive now
people are also seeing their utility
bills rise. So that that's what's
driving a lot of the concern for mayors
I think.
>> You know I know someone I heard about
there's a startup in New York City that
is um doing something with like I don't
know exactly what it is. I was hearing
about it from a friend, but they're like
training some Nvidia uh chips or doing
something and it's just with like a
normal like sort of like residential
connection to the electricity. It's
fairly small scale. It's not mega but
like yeah to your point like it does
feel like the footprints there at least
in some potentially niche applications
the footprints uh you hear about the
giant things but the footprints are also
potentially coming down.
>> That was what was what I was hear you
know I I'm an AI skeptic as a mayor. Um
I've been talked back I keep like you
know going back and forth
um but I was talking to somebody at um
Hopkins at Johns Hopkins who is like hey
you shouldn't be so skeptical because
it's going to open it it might result in
somewhat fewer human human react
interactions but it's going to open the
door for humans and city government
specifically to participate more and
more in helping people out and she was
the one who mentioned Like and it's also
like all of the like the fear about data
center might be misplaced. Like there is
we are I I'm not necessarily a great
believer in technology figuring out a
way to get us to like save our bacon for
forever but it does seem like this is
one that there's short-term concern
about and I don't know what what it
really stems from but whenever
politicians are involved you have to
raise an eyebrow. Yeah,
>> I have one more question and it's a very
important one. What's the deal with
Yakos? If I Google Allentown
controversy, like Yakos comes up.
>> Yeah, there I think there's probably a
couple of Yakos controversies. The the
very local one is uh like you got to
pick a choice. You got to choose between
Yakos or Pots. Apparently, they eat Pots
hot dogs in Bethlehem.
>> I guess we should say Yakos is a hot
dog. Okay. Yeah. Uh the folks in
Bethlehem, like I love my neighbor, but
I would never eat a pots dog. Um
[laughter]
Yakos is there's the one of the deals is
like you have to know how to order it,
right? So the order is like you just get
two dogs. I order two dogs with
everything and a chocolate milk. Um
>> some people get perogis with it too. Uh
the one of the there was a few years ago
a a guy named Gary Aayakoka whose family
owned Yakos uh talked about how his
Yakos on 7th Street which is in Center
City Allen Town couldn't exist anymore
because of the demographic changes that
we've seen in Allentown.
>> So Yakos I think is and it he and I went
back and forth a little bit. We're very
good friends now, but we we we're
struggled a little bit because I'm I'm
the first Latino mayor of Allentown. So,
the other thing that makes the Billy
Joel song so wrong in 2026 is that in
1982 it was like it was a very
homogeneous basically everybody in
Allentown was white European. Today, uh
we're 55% Latino. Like we are a very
different city. and his his case was
like, well, you know, it isn't it ain't
like it was and you know, it it was kind
it felt to me like kind of a rejection
of our new city that I I just love. Um,
so we went back and forth a little bit
on that. Um, there's probably other
Yakos controversies out there. Um,
there's like he's he has like a a big
hot dog statue that moved around a
little bit. Um, but
there it's a good hot dog. I if you come
to Allentown, I will treat you to a
Yakuza's hot dog. I know.
>> You'll teach us how to order it.
>> Teach you how to order.
>> This is like one of those things like
the politicians get a huge scandal. They
order it the wrong way. Like, you know,
as like John Kerry like order it, what
do you get? Like Swiss cheese instead of
something else.
>> Yeah. It's our version, I guess, of the
cheese steak.
>> There's a special like Lehigh Valley
version of the cheese steak as well that
um that Philadelphiaians would want
nothing to do with.
>> Huh.
>> This is what makes America great. these
like these niche these niche loyalties
towards certain orders and certain hot
dogs.
>> Yeah.
>> All right, Mayor Turk, thank you so much
for coming on A Thoughts. That was
great.
>> Thank you. I really had a good time.
>> So, that was super interesting. Um,
there were a lot of things to pick out
from there, but I one thing that stood
out was that sort of 2010's era of like
made in America craft manufacturing. I
remember that really well.
>> Yeah. No, totally. It's actually
apparently kind of depressing because
those MakerBot festival or the the
Makerbot I think is different than the
Maker festivals, but there was that
culture of people doing tinkering and
>> 3D printing the boom in 3D printing
stocks. Remember that?
>> Yeah. Yeah. There was like a thing and
it's like all sort of fizzled out. But
there was Yeah. It's like a forgotten
part of like postGFC
>> artisal manufacturing.
>> Artisal manufacturing and people are
just building weird stuff. Things aren't
things aren't weird enough anymore. But
yeah, I'm
>> Well, it might get weird with AI.
>> No, they're going to get weird. But uh
I'm glad he brought that up because I I
it doesn't get discussed enough.
>> Yeah,
>> just generally though, like I thought
that was great. And like, you know,
first of all, just learning a bunch of
new things. You know, I hadn't heard of
weight gaining manufacturing, but that
makes a lot of sense, right? Like if
there's some process that adds a lot of
weight, such as water, to a product, you
want that to be at the last mile of the
supply chain rather than early on. also
fascinating to think about like okay
what a strategic advantage it is to be
within a day's drive of a 100 million
people so therefore it makes a lot of
sense to put various you know e-commerce
warehouses in so much interesting stuff
there
>> also the mixed zoning I found really
interesting but because it is true if
you think about industry you know even
10 or 20 years ago it was much more
polluting and noisy and disturbing than
it is now and so you can have in an era
of high-tech manufacturing You
absolutely could have mixeduse
neighborhoods and buildings. Why not?
>> Right. So, you just have to update the
zoning to reflect the reality that it's
not going to be automatically repellent
to the neighbors.
>> And then everyone can walk to work with
their lunch boxes.
>> Yeah.
>> All right. Shall we leave it there?
>> Or the bike to work. Yeah.
>> Or bike to work. Yeah.
>> Yeah.
>> Okay. This has been another episode of
the All Thoughts podcast. I'm Tracy
Aloway. You can follow me at Tracy
Aloway.
>> And I'm Joe Weisenthal. You can follow
me at the stalwart. Follow our producers
Carmen Rodriguez at Carmen Arman Dashel
Bennett at Dashbot. Kale Brooks and Kell
Brooks and Kevin Lozano at Kevin Lloyd
Lozano. And for more OddLots content,
you should check out our daily
newsletter. You can find that at
bloomberg.com/odblots.
>> And you can chat about all these topics
with fellow listeners in our Discord
247. Discord.gg/odlots.
>> And if you enjoyed this conversation,
then please leave a comment or like the
video or better yet, subscribe.
>> Thanks for watching. Hey. Hey. Hey.
[music]